---
inFeed: true
hasPage: true
inNav: false
inLanguage: null
starred: false
keywords: []
description: ''
datePublished: '2016-04-02T03:35:49.553Z'
dateModified: '2016-04-02T03:34:31.066Z'
title: Why Story Structure is Like Chord Progression
author: []
sourcePath: _posts/2016-03-28-f6afabc4-226f-4fd6-9db8-2074dce51d0e.md
published: true
authors: []
publisher:
  name: null
  domain: null
  url: null
  favicon: null
url: f6afabc4-226f-4fd6-9db8-2074dce51d0e/index.html
_type: Article

---
# Why Story Structure is Like Chord Progression

There's a reason why works of art are often called compositions. They are by definition_composed,_with a certain structure that the creator felt best represented that work. Sometimes this process is unconscious, as when artists compose by instinct, sensing what feels right. Sometimes it is very conscious, as when a painter does multiple studies before they set brush to canvas, or a writer decides to plot a story before they ever sit down to write a word of it.

There is a bit of a rivalry between instinct and intention in the creative world. Some fall into the camp of the former, citing the magical wonder of inspiration as the only true artistic process. Some fall into the camp of the latter, maintaining that while inspiration is all well and good, the lack of a plan means wasted time and wasted commercial potential. Some straddle that line, beginning with inspiration then getting down to the hard work of craft...or putting a plan in place, only to let inspiration flow within the space between point A and point B. Sometimes this rivalry is simplified to art vs. craft, or the superfluous vs. the functional.

While I don't believe many people would criticize a visual artist for sketching their idea beforehand, in regards to fiction the backlash against story structure seems to come in waves.